---
title: "The nf-core/bactmap pipeline"
---

**Teaching: -- min** || **Exercises: -- min**

## Overview

:::::{.callout}

:::{.callout-important icon=false}
### Questions:
- What is nf-core/bactmap?
- How can I produce a multiple sequence alignment of TB sequences?
:::

:::{.callout-important icon=false}
### Learning Objectives:
- Use `nf-core/bactmap` to produce a multiple sequence alignment.
:::

:::{.callout-tip}
### Keypoints:
- To build a phylogenetic tree we need a _multiple sequence alignment_ of the sequences we want to infer a tree from. 
- Alignments are usually done against a reference genome.
- We can use the pipeline `nf-core/bactmap` to produce a multiple sequence alignment.
:::
:::::

## nf-core/bactmap

nf-core/bactmap is a bioinformatics best-practice analysis pipeline for mapping short reads from bacterial WGS to a reference sequence, creating filtered VCF files, making pseudogenomes based on high quality positions in the VCF files and optionally creating a phylogeny from an alignment of the pseudogenomes.  It makes use of many of the tools and techniques we've covered so far this week.

## TB dataset

We will be analysing a dataset of 83 TB genomes previously analysed by Prince as part of his PhD.

::: {.callout-note}
#### Data for this section

We will work from the course files folder called `08-bactmap`, which contains the following files: 

- `reference/MTB_ANC_unwrapped.fasta` is the reference genome
- `data` is the directory containing the fastq files we're going to map to the reference genome
:::

::: {.callout-note}
#### MTBC ancestral sequence

The reference sequence we'll use to map our TB samples back to is one commonly used in the MTBC community and is known as the MTBC ancestral sequence.  It was generated as part of Comas *et al.* 2013 (link to paper). This sequence was created by building an alignment and phylogenetic tree of the known MTBC genomes at the time and inferring what the most likely sequence of the ancestor of the MTBC was.  It is a useful sequence to use when comparing different members of the MTBC as it should reduce the amount of bias towards any particular reference that is more closely related to one lineage than another.

:::

## Installing nextflow

Before we run the nf-core/bactmap pipeline, we need to install Nextflow.  The best way to do this is to create a conda environment called Nextflow and install it there:

```bash
conda create -n nextflow
```

Now activate the nextflow environment and install nextflow:

```bash
conda activate nextflow

conda install -c bioconda nextflow
```

Now we can start getting ready to run bactmap.

## Setting up the Nextflow config file

As we learnt in the nf-core module, we can create a config file that tells `Nextflow` which parameters to use e.g. the job submission system.  We've create a basic template that will allow you to run nf-core/bactmap on the teaching computers/HPC.  The config file looks like this:

```groovy
```

## Running nf-core/bactmap to generate an alignment

The first step in building a phylogenetic tree is to generate a multiple sequence alignment.  To do this, we're going to map the sequence data for our 83 TB genomes to a reference, in this case the MTBC inferred ancestral sequence, using the `nf-core/bactmap` pipeline.

First create a directory a directory for the output:

```bash
mkdir -p results/bactmap
```

Now create a `samplesheet.csv` file containing the sample IDs and the location of the files to be mapped:

```bash
python fastq_dir_to_samplesheet.py \
    data \
    samplesheet.csv \
    -r1 _1.fastq.gz \
    -r2 _2.fastq.gz
```

The meaning of the options used is:

- `data` is the directory containing the fastq files
- `samplesheet.csv` the name of the input file for `nf-core/bactmap`
- `-r1` and `-r2` the suffixes of the forward and reverse sequence files. By default the `fastq_dir_to_samplesheet.py` script will use everything before this to create the sample IDs

Now run the `nf-core/bactmap` command to generate a reference-based alignment:

```bash
nextflow run nf-core/bactmap \
    -profile singularity \
    --input samplesheet.csv \
    --reference reference/MTB_ANC_unwrapped.fasta \
    --genome_size 4.3mb \
    --outdir results/bactmap
```

`nf-core/bactmap` has a number of optional arguments but for now these are the ones we're going to use:

- `nextflow run` is the software and option we're going to use to run the `nf-core/bactmap` pipeline
- `-profile singularity` tells `nextflow` to pull `singularity` containers for each tool in the pipeline.  We could also use `docker` or `conda`
- `--input samplesheet.csv` tells `nextflow` which samples to analyse and where they're located
- `--reference reference/MTB_ANC_unwrapped.fasta` is the reference sequence we're going to map our samples to
- `--genome_size 4.3mb` is used by the pipeline to calculate the approximate genome coverage in the fastq files. By default the pipeline uses a tool called `rasusa` to subsample the fastq files so the genome coverage is <= 100X
- `--outdir results/bactmap` is the directory we're going to save the outputs from `nf-core/bactmap` to 

Visit the [`nf-core/bactmap`](https://nf-co.re/bactmap) page for further information on running the pipeline with different options.

If the pipeline has started successfully, you should see something like this:

```groovy
```

The pipeline will take a while to run so we'll have a look at the results in the morning.

## Credit
Information on this page has been adapted and modified from the following source(s):
